DOCSP-18223: added a distinct() page (#338)
mongodb/docs-node: source/fundamentals/crud/read-operations/distinct.txt

.. _node-fundamentals-distinct:

========================
Retrieve Distinct Values
========================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

Use the ``distinct()`` method to retrieve all distinct values for a specified field 
across a collection.

Sample Documents
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Follow the instructions in the examples below to insert data into a collection and

> return the unique values of a given field. Consider the following collection of 

Reviewer: issue: I didn't catch this earlier, but looking at the page again I noticed that this sentence doesn't seem to apply to the page since there aren't instructions for inserting data into a collection.

documents that describe restaurants: 

.. code-block:: json

   [
      { "_id": 1, "restaurant": "White Bear", "borough": "Queens", "cuisine": "Chinese" },
      { "_id": 2, "restaurant": "Via Carota", "borough": "Manhattan", "cuisine": "Italian" },
      { "_id": 3, "restaurant": "Borgatti's", "borough": "Bronx", "cuisine": "Italian" },
      { "_id": 4, "restaurant": "Tanoreen", "borough": "Brooklyn", "cuisine": "Middle Eastern" },
      { "_id": 5, "restaurant": "Äpfel", "borough": "Queens", "cuisine": "German" },
      { "_id": 6, "restaurant": "Samba Kitchen", "borough": "Manhattan", "cuisine": "Brazilian" },
   ]

.. include:: /includes/access-cursor-note.rst

Distinct
--------

Use a document field name as a parameter for the ``distinct()`` method to return a 

> list of the field's unique values. Optionally, you can specify a ``query`` 
> parameter to narrow down your results or an ``options`` parameter to set the 
> string comparison language.

Reviewer: issue (non-blocking): The way this reads to me, it feels like an "OR" decision. It might be more clear to state that this is additive.

```suggestion
list of the field's unique values. You can also specify an optional ``query`` 
parameter to narrow your results and an optional``options`` parameter to set the 
string comparison language.
```

Example
```````

Some boroughs, like "``Queens``", are represented multiple times in the restaurant 
documents. However, the following example retrieves only the unique values of the 

> ``borough`` field: 

Reviewer: issue: It might be more obvious to readers to explicitly state that although "Queens" and "Manhattan" are present in many documents, distinct retrieves the unique values of the borough field (only and unique being fairly synonymous).

.. code-block:: javascript

   // specify "borough" as the field to return values for
   const cursor = collection.distinct("borough");
   await cursor.forEach(console.dir);

This code outputs the following ``borough`` values:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   [ "Bronx", "Brooklyn", "Manhattan", "Queens" ]

Query Parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can define a query parameter to prevent the ``distinct()`` method from returning 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify a query parameter to prevent the ``distinct()`` method from returning 
```

> certain distinct values.

Reviewer: issue: Is the query parameter only for specifying documents you want to exclude? If not, maybe leave that for the example explanation and reframe this to something like:
You can specify a query parameter to ``distinct()`` so that it only returns unique values for documents that match your query.

> Visit :doc:`Specify a Query </fundamentals/crud/query-document>` for more information 

Reviewer: issue: prefer :ref: over :doc:. If the page is missing a reference please define one and use it.

on constructing a query filter.

Example
```````

The following example outputs the distinct values of the ``cuisine`` field but 
excludes restaurants in "``Brooklyn``":

.. code-block:: javascript

   // exclude Brooklyn restaurants from the output
   const query = { borough: { $ne: "Brooklyn" }};

   // find the filtered distinct values of "cuisine"
   const cursor = collection.distinct("cuisine", query);
   await cursor.forEach(console.dir);

In this case, the query filter prevents the ``distinct()`` method from matching a 
"``Middle Eastern``" Brooklyn restaurant. The code outputs the following ``cuisine`` 

> values:

Reviewer: issue: The query ignores all documents where `borough` is "Brooklyn", so the byproduct is the omission of "Middle Eastern" from the distinct list of cuisine values since it isn't in any other documents with a different `borough`.

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   [ "Brazilian", "Chinese", "German", "Italian" ]

Options Parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can specify the language collation of the ``distinct()`` method by defining a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify the language collation to the ``distinct()`` method by defining a 
```

``collation`` field as an ``options`` parameter. This field allows you to set 
language-specific rules for string ordering and comparisons. 

See :doc:`Collations </fundamentals/collations>` for instructions on applying 
collations.

.. note::

   When using the ``options`` parameter, you must also specify a ``query`` parameter. If

>    you don't want to use a query filter, define the query as ``{}``.

Reviewer: This is an excellent explanation!

Example
```````

The following example uses a ``collation`` field to specify German language ordering 
conventions when outputting the distinct ``restaurant`` values:

.. code-block:: javascript

   // define an empty query document
   const query = {};
   // specify German string ordering conventions
   const options = { collation: { locale: "de" }};

   const cursor = collection.distinct("restaurant", query, options);
   await cursor.forEach(console.dir);

In this case, German string ordering conventions place words beginning with "Ä" before
those beginning with "B". The code outputs the following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   [ "Äpfel", "Borgatti's", "Samba Kitchen", "Tanoreen", "Via Carota", "White Bear" ]

Without specifying a ``collation`` field, the output order would follow default
binary collation rules. These rules place words beginning with "Ä" after the those
with unaccented first letters:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

>    [ "Borgatti's", "Samba Kitchen", "Tanoreen", "Via Carota", "White Bear", "Äpfel" ]

Reviewer: Nicely illustrated.

      { "_id": 5, "restaurant": "Äpfel", "borough": "Queens", "cuisine": "German" },
      { "_id": 6, "restaurant": "Samba Kitchen", "borough": "Manhattan", "cuisine": "Brazilian" },
   ]

.. include:: /includes/access-cursor-note.rst

Distinct
--------

Use a document field name as a parameter for the ``distinct()`` method to return a 
list of the field's unique values. You can specify two optional parameters to adjust
the method output:

- A ``query`` parameter to refine your results 
- An ``options`` parameter to set collation rules

Example
```````

The "``Queens``" and "``Manhattan``" borough values each appear more than
once in the sample documents. However, the following example retrieves the 
unique values of the ``borough`` field: 

.. code-block:: javascript

   // specify "borough" as the field to return values for
   const cursor = collection.distinct("borough");
   await cursor.forEach(console.dir);

This code outputs the following ``borough`` values:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   [ "Bronx", "Brooklyn", "Manhattan", "Queens" ]

Query Parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can specify a ``distinct()`` query parameter to only return unique values for 
> documents that match your query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify a query parameter to return unique values for 
documents that match your query.
```
